---
layout:     post
title:      "Falling for the First Draft"
subtitle:   "Step-by-step"
date:       2015-05-26 16:27:54
author:     "Tara Ahmed"
header-img: "img/post-bg-05.jpg"
---

<p>You are the writer. You look at those chapters you’ve written, re-reading each word, re-analyzing every scene, re-thinking about those stylized character names, and then telling yourself, “This is crap.”</p>

<p>That novel you’ve been working on for months, maybe years, is perhaps the worst thing you’ve ever read, and it belongs to you. It is the compilation of your blood, sweat, and ink, poured onto every paragraph, and for a moment you wonder, “How can I fix it?”</p>

<p>The plot holes are too deep, and you really need to change the location of a particular scene, and it’s all just too much for your literary mind to handle!</p>

<p><i>So what’s a writer to do?</i></p>

<p>As cliché as it sounds…you must not give up. You must never give up. This novel was your vision- an italicized quilt which you made, and though the yarns are loose, you can always tighten it back together.</p>

<p>And here’s how you’ll do it:</p>

<h2>Step One: Fall in Love</h2>

<p>Write down what made you feel passionate about your book, so that you can become excited about it all over again…like falling back in love. Write a paragraph about everything that makes you smile about your story, and why I, the reader, should give a damn. If you can’t love your book, neither can I. Do not have doubts in your story, for if you do, then that doubt will show through in your writing. Remember, you are in a committed relationship with your book, and the only way to marriage is through a pure commitment.</p>

<p>You must be faithful to your first draft. Do NOT begin a new story without having edited the first one, because that only shows that you are a quitter. Your first draft needs your devoted attention, for it is broken, and you must piece it together.</p>

<h2> Step Two: The Engagement</h2>

<p>Yes, you’ve done it! You no longer detest your first draft, and, dare I say it, you’ve found hope in making it shine.</p>

<p>Now, this is where things get a little frustrating.</p>

<p>No, scratch that.</p>

<p>Things get VERY frustrating.</p>

<p>Ah, but it is this frustration that will pay off in the end. The fruits of your labor will be sweet, I assure you.</p>

<p>So get ready to spell check, proof read, and fix those awkward metaphors.</p>

<p>Remember, this is the first draft, so you do not need to worry about plot holes as of yet. You must first do a spell check the old fashioned way. Often times Microsoft Word will not pick up certain words that you did not intend to add. For example, you may accidentally write “no” instead of “know”, but both words are spelled correctly.</p>

<p>This is why you must do a thorough spellcheck yourself. While you spellcheck, fix any awkward phrasing as you go along. Delete any repetitive sentences, and make each paragraph clean. Do this for each chapter.</p>

<p>Basically, your routine should be like this:</p>

<p>Read the first paragraph, spell check, re-write it, make it neat and clean. Come on, you’re a writer! You know what sounds lame and what doesn’t. Think of the first draft as a kind of spring cleaning, except for your book.</p>

<p>Focus on your dialogue. If it sounds awkward- delete it, for if you’re going to question your dialogue, then so will the reader. Say the dialogue out loud, or get a friend to act out the scene with you. Yes, as strange as it seems, it works- now you can see the interaction of your character’s conversation in real life.</p>

<p><i>Pretty cool,right?</i></p>

<h2>Step Three: Walking down the aisle</h2>

<p>So your first draft is almost complete. It is spell checked, dialogue ready, and proofread to perfection. Absolutely nothing can destroy this beautiful union between you and your book.</p>

<p>Hmm…are you sure about that?</p>

<p>Look closer…what’s missing?</p>

<p>In the distance of the dark literary horizon, beyond the Blue Mountains, staggering on a cane down the valley of plots, your protagonist falls down a deadly hole.</p>

<p>You want to save him, but you can’t! It’s too late.</p>

<p>“No, it’s not,” you say. “I can fix this! I can!”</p>

<p>Though you are confident that you can pull your character out of that infinitely deep hole, your only question is, “how?”</p>

<p>Well...here's how:</p>

<p>Re-read your book, then write about every inconsistency you can think of. Any situation in the novel that does not propel the story forward, or resolve a particular conflict, is a plot hole. Any situation which does not answer a question that MUST be answered in the novel is a plot hole. Any scene where a character promises to do one thing, yet that promise is never addressed in other chapters, is a plot hole.</p>

<p>Plot holes are not only limited to the protagonist, for the secondary, and minor characters can also create holes. For example, if you mentioned a specific character or introduced a conflict with a minor character that was never addressed later on in the story, is a plot hole.</p>

<p>Write down all these holes through bullet points on a Microsoft Word document. Being organized will give you a much better first draft, and a fresh starting point to your second draft.</p>

<p>Filling in the plot holes is possibly the most irritating part of the novel writing process, however, if successfully done, the rewards are incomparable. Sure, there will always be critics of your novel, for some will say they love it, while others will say they hate it. This is the reality of publishing, and even the greatest writers have so called “haters”.</p>

<p>But when you polish that first draft, filling in those messy plot holes…I’d like you to take a step back, and smile at your creation.</p>

<p><i>You did it.</i></p>

<p><i>You made it.</i></p>

<p>Now…all that’s left is the second and third draft…but we’ll get to that later. For now, let’s celebrate. You deserve it.</p>